# Transport Layer Security (TLS) / Secure Sockets Layer (SSL)

SSL stands for Secure Sockets Layer, and it refers to a protocol for encrypting and securing communications that take place on the Internet. Although SSL was replaced by an updated protocol called TLS (Transport Layer Security) some time ago, "SSL" is still a commonly used term for this technology.

The main use case for SSL/TLS is securing communications between a client and a server, but it can also secure email, VoIP, and other communications over unsecured networks.

## How does SSL/TLS work?
These are the essential principles to grasp for understanding how SSL/TLS works:

- Secure communication begins with a TLS handshake, in which the two communicating parties open a secure connection and exchange the public key.
- During the TLS handshake, the two parties generate session keys, and the session keys encrypt and decrypt all communications after the TLS handshake.
- Different session keys are used to encrypt communications in each new session.
- TLS ensures that the party on the server side, or the website the user is interacting with, is actually who they claim to be.
- TLS also ensures that data has not been altered, since a message authentication code (MAC) is included with transmissions.
  
With TLS, both HTTP data that users send to a website (by clicking, filling out forms, etc.) and the HTTP data that websites send to users is encrypted. Encrypted data has to be decrypted by the recipient using a key.

## The TLS handshake
TLS handshakes are a series of datagrams, or messages, exchanged by a client and a server. A TLS handshake involves multiple steps, as the client and server exchange the information necessary for completing the handshake and making further conversation possible.

1. The 'client hello' message: The client initiates the handshake by sending a "hello" message to the server. The message will include which TLS version the client supports, the cipher suites supported, and a random value known as the "client random."
2. The 'server hello' message: In reply to the client hello message, the server sends a message containing the server's SSL certificate, the server's chosen cipher suite, and the "server random," another random value that's generated by the server. The server may also request a certificate from the client. 
3. Authentication: The client verifies the server's SSL certificate with the certificate authority that issued it. This confirms that the server is who it says it is, and that the client is interacting with the actual owner of the domain. If the server requested for a certificate, the client sends that as well.
4. The premaster secret: The client sends one more random value, the "premaster secret." The premaster secret is encrypted with the public key and can only be decrypted with the private key by the server. (The client gets the public key from the server's SSL certificate.)
5. Private key used: The server decrypts the premaster secret.
6. Session keys created: Both client and server generate session keys from the client random, the server random, and the premaster secret. They should arrive at the same results.
7. Client is ready: The client sends "Change cipher spec" notification to server to indicate that the client will start using the new session keys for hashing and encrypting messages. The client also sends a "finished" message that is encrypted with this session key.
8. Server is ready: Server receives "Change cipher spec" and switches its record layer security state to symmetric encryption using the session keys. The server sends a "finished" message encrypted with a session key.
9. Secure symmetric encryption achieved: The handshake is completed, and communication continues using the session keys.
    
TLS communication sessions begin with a TLS handshake. A TLS handshake uses asymmetric encryption, meaning that two different keys are used on the two ends of the conversation. This is possible because of a technique called public key cryptography.

During the TLS handshake, the client and server use the public and private keys to exchange randomly generated data, and this random data is used to create new keys for encryption, called the session keys.

## Symmetric encryption with session keys
Unlike asymmetric encryption, in symmetric encryption the two parties in a conversation use the same key. After the TLS handshake, both sides use the same session keys for encryption. Once session keys are in use, the public and private keys are not used anymore. Session keys are temporary keys that are not used again once the session is terminated. A new, random set of session keys will be created for the next session.

## Authenticating the origin server
TLS communications from the server include a message authentication code, or MAC, which is a digital signature confirming that the communication originated from the actual website. This authenticates the server, preventing on-path attacks and domain spoofing. It also ensures that the data has not been altered in transit.

## What is an SSL certificate?
An SSL certificate is a file installed on a website's origin server. It's simply a data file containing the public key and the identity of the website owner, along with other information. Without an SSL certificate, a website's traffic can't be encrypted with TLS.

Technically, any website owner can create their own SSL certificate, and such certificates are called self-signed certificates. However, browsers do not consider self-signed certificates to be as trustworthy as SSL certificates issued by a certificate authority. Website owners need to obtain an SSL certificate from a certificate authority, and then install it on their web server (often a web host can handle this process). A certificate authority is an outside party who can confirm that the website owner is who they say they are. They keep a copy of the certificates they issue.


## What is the difference between HTTP and HTTPS?
The S in "HTTPS" stands for "secure." HTTPS is just HTTP with SSL/TLS. A website with an HTTPS address has a legitimate SSL certificate issued by a certificate authority, and traffic to and from that website is authenticated and encrypted with the SSL/TLS protocol.

To encourage the Internet as a whole to move to the more secure HTTPS, many web browsers have started to mark HTTP websites as "not secure" or "unsafe." Thus, not only is HTTPS essential for keeping users safe and user data secure, it has also become essential for building trust with users.